\section{Requirements} \label{sec:Requirements}

Bennett et al. (\citeyear[][pp.~140-142]{bennett2010object}) categorises
requirements as being of three types:

\begin{description} \item[Functional Requirements]
    The system's functionality -- what it is expected to do.
    
  \item[Non-functional Requirements]
    How well the system delivers its functionality. These requirements are
    related to the performance, scalability, availability, recovery time,
    security, and others.

  \item[Usability Requirements]
    These relate to how effectively, efficiently and satisfactorily users can
    achieve their goals in the existing system. User interfaces can play a big
    part in meeting these requirements.
\end{description}

The initial implementation iterations will be focused more on the functional
and usability requirements, paying some attention as well to specific
non-functional requirements such as performance and security.


\subsection{Functional Requirements} \label{sec:Requirements.FunctionalRequirements}

Any personal accounting system should be able to provide accurate and relevant
summaries of an individual's financial status. In order to do this, the user
needs to be able to supply the system with the relevant data so that it can be
analysed and properly converted into the relevant knowledge.

It seems fair to infer that nowadays most of a user's financial transactions
currently happen in ways that can be listed electronically -- a study by
Payments UK (\citeyear{paymentsUK2017summary}), for example, indicates that
there has been a rise in debit card payments over the past few years, and that
the volumes of this type of transaction is likely to be higher than that of
cash payments by the year 2021. Therefore, an assumption has been made that the
users will require means of uploading a list of their financial transactions
into the system, and this has been identified as a functional requirement.

The system created for this project intends to do just this. Its main feature,
however, will be a system for the user to categorise expenditure based on
patterns in these entries. However, in order not to restrict the system to the
uploading of transactions only, it must also be possible for a user to create
entries manually.


\subsubsection{Requirements Model} \label{sec:Requirements.RequirementsModel}

Use case diagrams are an UML construct which were developed by Jacobson et al.
(1992, cited \cite[][p.~154]{bennett2010object}). The use case diagram below is
used to illustrate the functional requirements listed in
\ref{sec:Requirements.FunctionalRequirements}:

\begin{figure}[ht!]
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=14cm]{./contents/img/Use_Case_Diagram.png}
  \end{center}
\end{figure}
\FloatBarrier

The wireframe below was created to better illustrate the \emph{Manual Entry} requirement:
\begin{figure}[ht!]
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=14cm]{./contents/img/Wireframe_-_Manual_Entry.png}
  \end{center}
\end{figure}
\FloatBarrier
